# Breast Cancer Detection in Mammograms using Deep Neural Networks

## Abstract

Breast cancer has become the most common form of cancer in Indian, recently having over- taken cervical cancer in urban cities. Immense research has been carried out on breast cancer and several automated machines for detection have been formed, however, they are far from perfection and medical assessments need more reliable services. Also, very little research has been performed on Indian datasets, which are significantly different than the available foreign resources. Indian breasts are more dense and hence differ in texture, lesion size and com- position. Our works aims to reproduce the state of the art results reported by researchers using deep learning approaches to automate breast cancer detection and extend them to build deep learning breast cancer detection networks which are more specific to Indian breast types and alongside use metadata of age, breast density, past history and other available informa- tion to enable more accurate judgement and treatment. Working in close collaboration with a radiologist from AIIMS Delhi, our work develops alternative object detection frameworks, ensemble and transformer networks to improve and enhance both classification and detection of breast lesions. Various analysis technique have been applied to measure performance and conduct thorough investigation of our experiments.

## Acknowledgments

We thank Prof. Chetan Arora for giving us this project and providing us the guidance and support for all our work. We also thank Prof. Subhashis Banerjee for the insightful discussions and his continuous advice. We express our gratitude towards Dr. Krithika Rangarajan for constantly being there to help us and enabling us to learn and appreciate the field.

## Problem Statement

Breast cancer impacts nearly 1.5 million women in all over the world each year and causes the greatest number of cancer-related death of women. Trends say 1 in every 8 women will be diag- nosed with breast cancer in her lifetime. Breast cancer has become the most common form of cancer in Indian urban cities, recently having overtaken cervical cancer and 2nd most common in rural India. There has been a shocking increase in the number of cases affecting women at a much younger age than 25 years ago. Most women today in India fall pray to breast cancer at around their 40s, which is much younger than when cancer hits in foreign countries.

The major causes of breast cancer are mostly genetic - damaged DNA and family history. However, other risk factors can be lifestyle or environmental related, like alcohol consumption - studies reveal that women who consume 3 drinks a day have a 1.5 times higher chance of being affected, obesity, hormonal treatments - an increased level of estrogen due to hormone replace- ment therapy of birth control pills can link to breast cancer, sedentary life without physical exercise. Other reasons such as bearing a child late in life or improper breastfeeding may also be responsible.
However, the biggest reasons are the lack of awareness, treatment and screening methods. Non availability of expert radiologists and diagnostic centres and delay in extending necessary care is a major concern. In an attempt to assist this growing cause, we aim to develop deep learning models to detect suspicious lesions and hence provide timely and effective diagnosis.

One may argue that immense research has been carried out on breast cancer and similar learning machines have been developed in the past. However, we found that although these machines exist, they are far from perfection and medical assessments need more reliable services. Also, very little research has been performed on Indian datasets. Most results and infact all datasets too, are only available for foreign patients. We notice several variations in the breast develop- ment and structure of Indian women including age difference when cancer initiates and breast tissues - Indian breasts are more fibrous, hence whiter and denser. We therefore feel that the same networks when applied on Indian cases cannot yield accurate information.
Our aim is to build deep learning breast cancer detection models which are more specific to Indian breast types and alongside use metadata of age, breast density, past history and other available information to enable more accurate judgement and treatment.
